The Federal Reserve 

The Federal Reserve is a crucial part of our economy. They have a dual mandate which is to keep prices stable, about two percent inflation, and unemployment low, around 4.25 percent unemployment. There are many pieces that must all move together to keep our economy afloat. As a country we have been through many challenges, and the federal reserve has been there to help us get through by changing rates, helping banks, and doing everything in its power to achieve that dual mandate.  

Monetary Lessons 

Throughout history we learn very important lessons about many things. One of the most crucial lessons we can learn is about what happens with our money during different economic periods, specifically recessions. Two of the largest and most recent recessions were the 2008 Great Recession and the COVID-19 pandemic. While these were challenging times for many people, the monetary lessons we have learned are essential for knowing how to handle these types of situations in the future.  

2008 Great Recession 

The Great Recession was a challenging time for not only consumers, but the Federal Reserve as well. According to Robert Rich (2013), the author of “The Great Recession” from the Federal Reserve History website, this was the largest recession since World War II. The real gross domestic product, or GDP, declined 4.3 percent from its peak in 2007, which was the biggest decrease since the war ​(Rich, 2013)​. Unemployment peaked at ten percent in October of 2009, which is significantly above the acceptable rate of 4.25 percent ​(Rich, 2013)​. Rich (2013) states that the “S&P 500 index fell 57 percent” and “home prices fell approximately 30 percent, on average,” which are both enormous decreases that hurt the economy. These major declines in all different areas of the economy led to the Federal Reserve having to step in.  

To help revive the economy, the Federal Reserve had to step in and help in both traditional and nontraditional ways. Like many other countries, the United States needed to do something to get the money flowing again. They used a combination of tax cuts and government spending to do this, which led to the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 and the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 ​(Rich, 2013)​. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) also reduced the federal funds rate from 5.25 percent to a range of 0-0.25 percent ​(Rich, 2013)​. The Board of Governors in 2009 suggested that they keep the rates low “’for an extended period’” of time to make sure that consumers still had incentives to spend money ​(Rich, 2013)​. Because the Great Recession was so hard to get out of and took so much time, they turned to two nontraditional policies. The first program stated in the article was a “credit easing program that sought to facilitate credit flows and reduce the cost of credit” ​(Rich, 2013)​. The other was the large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) which helped to keep borrowing rates down ​(Rich, 2013)​. As you can see in Figure 1 below, the Federal Funds Rate didn’t start to increase until December 2015, which means that the Federal Reserve had to work for a long period of time to keep our economy afloat.  

Figure 1 

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) (2023). [Graph of Federal Funds Effective Rate]. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Federal Funds Effective Rate (FEDFUNDS) | FRED | St. Louis Fed (stlouisfed.org) 

COVID-19 

COVID-19 was another major recession in our economy that happened more recently. Like the Great Recession in 2008, unemployment spiked, people stopped spending money, and our GDP fell significantly. To be specific, in the article “COVID-19’s Effects on the Economy and the Fed’s Response,” the authors state that unemployment spiked to 14.7 percent, consumer spending fell 6.6 percent in March and 12.6 percent in April, and GDP fell 5 percent in the first quarter and 33 percent in the second quarter​ (Ihrig, Weinbach, & Wolla, 2020)​. A lot of these increases or decreases in data came from businesses being shut down due to the social distancing restrictions. Having businesses shut down is what caused all our supply chain issues as well. Once again, the Federal Reserve had to step in to keep our economy going. 

The Federal Reserve did most things similar to how they did it during the Great Recession. They decreased the federal funds rate to almost zero, tried to stabilize the financial system using a specific series of steps, and implemented programs to keep the credit in the economy flowing smoothly ​(Ihrig, Weinbach, & Wolla, 2020)​. By having the federal funds rate at almost zero, it incentives consumers and businesses to spend. The Federal Reserve also purchased an enormous amount of securities to pump money into the economy and lowered the cost for banks to borrow from the Federal Reserve ​(Ihrig, Weinbach, & Wolla, 2020)​. According to the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s website, in the section “Economic Impact Payments,” the Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) sent out a series of three stimulus checks to Americans to help them during this challenging time ​(Economic Impact Payments, n.d.)​. By doing all of these things, the Federal Reserve was able to start increasing the Federal Funds Rate by 2022 as seen in Figure 1, which was a significantly faster turnaround than during the Great Recession.  

Comparison: Then v. Now 

Although the Great Recession and COVID-19 were both recessions, they still had some differences of what the economy looked like and what the reasons were for the recession. According to Forbes’s article, “Here’s How the Coronavirus Recession Compares to The Great Recession” by Sarah Hansen (2020), there were 24.4 million more jobs lost in the first few months of the COVID-19 recession than there were during the entire Great Recession. As a result of losing all those jobs, the unemployment rate was 4.7 percent higher in April 2020 than during the peak unemployment of the Great Recession ​(Hansen, 2020)​. Regarding the different stimulus packages, in just the first few months of COVID-19 Congress authorized 1.5 trillion more dollars than during the entire Great Recession ​(Hansen, 2020)​. There were different reasons however for the two recessions. The Great Recession was “’a result of financial imbalances – starting primarily in the housing sector,’” and the COVID-19 recession was due to the whole world being shut down from the coronavirus ​(Hansen, 2020)​. While these two recessions are similar in some respects, they are different. We have been able to recover much faster from the COVID-19 recession because employees have been able to go back to work, which has allowed unemployment to go down and prices to start to stabilize.  

Monetary Policy 

While there are many policies in place when talking about the flow of money and economic well-being, monetary policy is one of the most important policies that help achieve the Federal Reserve's goal of maximum employment and price stability. While both objectives are preferred, many things play into changing employment and price stability. One of those being inflation. 

Inflation (2022) 

Inflation measures the rate of increase in prices of particular groups of goods and services over a period of time, typically, in a year ​(Oner, 2019)​. One of the things that plays into inflation is consumer spending habits. This is determined by calculating the CPI or Consumer Price Index. The CPI inflation rate in January 2022 was 7.5 percent making it the largest 12-month increase since February 1982  ​(CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – JANUARY 2022, 2022)​. Inflation spiked after the Covid era because of a decrease in demand for service goods (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, ​(What caused inflation to spike after 2020?, 2023)​. A big reason for this was because of an increase in job vacancies and unemployment as well as price changes in the auto industry due to Covid ​ (What caused inflation to spike after 2020?, 2023)​. Another reason for a rise in inflation was because of an increase in personal consumption expenditures (PCE). In 2022, the PCE increased by 9.2 percent from the previous year, 2021 ​(Consumer Spending by State, 2022)​. With more consumer spending and monetary activity going back into the economy, increased prices are likely to happen. 

Federal Reserve Policy Moves 

A healthy inflation rate is around 2 percent each year. When inflation gets to be too high, this plays against the Federal Reserve's mission of price stability. This is why Monetary Policy is beneficial with their three strategies or tools. These three tools include open market operations, the discount rate, and reserve requirements. Monetary policy has two different branches when making decisions. Contractionary and expansionary. A contractionary policy is used to bring in the money supply to slow rising prices and inflation ​ (Monetary Policy Meaning, Types, and Tools, 2023)​. An expansionary policy is used to put money back into the economy during states like a recession ​ (Monetary Policy Meaning, Types, and Tools, 2023)​. In this case, the contractionary branch of Monetary Policy was used to combat inflation. In open market operations, the FED banks sell bonds to investors to try and take money out of the circular flow and lower the amount of money available in the economy​ (Monetary Policy Meaning, Types, and Tools, 2023)​. The discount rate is set as a ceiling for banks to adjust their interest rates more or less freely to take money out of the economy through interest rates ​(Monetary Policy Meaning, Types, and Tools, 2023)​. The discount rate at the end of May 2022 was 0.94%, which continued to dramatically rise throughout the rest of that year into 2023 ​(Charts, 2023)​. The Federal Funds rate at the beginning of 2022 was a steady 0.08% before rising to 0.33% in March 2022 and continuing to rise ​(Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), 2023)​. The IORB rate started at 0.15 in the beginning of 2022, then increased to 0.40 in March of that year and kept increasing ​(Louis, 2023)​. 

Figure 2 

 

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) (2023). [Graph of Federal Funds Effective Rate and 	Discount Rate for United States]. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?	g=jafQ  

Current Update (2023) 

The current inflation rate as of October 2023 has risen 3.2 percent over the past 12 months​ (CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – OCTOBER 2023, 2023)​. The CPI has gone up by 3.3 percent for food and energy has gone down by 4.5 percent in the last 12 months​ (CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – OCTOBER 2023, 2023)​. One of the big reasons for an increase in inflation is that there is more consumer spending. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, consumer spending in October 2023 increased $42.1 billion since October 2022​ (Consumer Spending by State, 2023)​. To try and lower the inflation rate, the Fed's current discount rate has been 5.50 since July ​(Charts, 2023)​. The Federal Funds rate is 5.33 percent and has been since late July of this year and the IORB has been 5.40 since August ​(Louis, 2023)​. Seeing as the rate has been constant for the past few months after the steady climb since 2022, it can be predicted that the Federal Reserve is getting close to balancing out the inflation and lowering interest rates. As recorded by the Wall Street Journal, Chair of the Federal Reserve Jerome Powell stated, “…tight monetary policy is slowing economic activity,” ​ (Timiraos, 2023)​. Officials of the Fed are reluctant to confirm that interest rates will decrease but from previous statements, interest rates are speculated to decrease in May of 2024 (Timiraos, 2023). 

Fiscal Policy Reference 

The Federal Reserve primarily operates with monetary policy when attempting to regulate money supply, interest rates, and financial stability. Fiscal policy is much more indirect but still significant, involving interest rate management, Quantitative Easing, and Open Market Operations. Interest rate management by the Federal Reserve is accomplished by adjusting the federal funds rate and influencing banks borrowing costs. Which in turn will affect interest rates for consumers and businesses. The interest rate is a crucial part of the economy, affecting spending, investing, and overall activity. With open market operations, the Federal Reserve can buy and sell government securities to control the money supply and interest rate. For example, the Federal Reserve might implement quantitative easing in an economic crisis. “Quantitative easing (QE) is a form of monetary policy in which a central bank, like the U.S. Federal Reserve, purchases securities from the open market to reduce interest rates and increase the money supply” (the Investopedia team). Now, the Federal Reserve does not set fiscal policy directly, but it plays a substantial role in the function of the US economy.  

The Federal Reserve's relationship with taxation solely lies within the landscape of the economy. The government's taxation plays a significant role in the economy, such as investment, saving, and economic growth. Therefore, Congress and the Federal Reserve must be on the same page. The Federal Reserve doesn’t directly set fiscal policy but considers fiscal policy when it sets its monetary policy. For example, the Federal Reserve may implement specific monetary policies to ensure maximum employment and price stability if the government has any tax reductions or increases. As well as attempting to mitigate potential inflationary or deflationary pressures.  

The Federal Reserve's relationship with the white house is crucial. There is constant communication between the president and their administration with the Federal Reserve in the agreement on economic goals and the economy's overall condition. Also, ensure that the fiscal policies set by Congress align with the monetary policy that the Federal Reserve sets. Ultimately, the general goal is maximum employment, price stability, and inflation tamed as much as possible.  

Congress has a substantial role in the process of fiscal policies by passing budgets, enacting tax laws, and overseeing government spending. The Federal Reserve and Congress are both connected by fiscal and monetary policies. The Federal Reserve's chair regularly communicates with Congress on the economy's condition. They are also giving recommendations on policy decisions. Congressional oversight ensures accountability and transparency in the Federal Reserve's operations, allowing the Federal Reserve and Congress to have discussions to ensure that monetary and fiscal policies are aligned. In this relationship, the Federal Reserve acts as the source of information for Congress with anything related to the economy.  

Unemployment	 

The unemployment rate is arguably the variable that the majority of people are most familiar with when it comes to evaluating economic indicators and making predictions about the future of the U.S. economy. Not only does it attract the attention of politicians, policymakers, business economists, and academics, but it also attracts the attention of the general population. It is generally accepted that the unemployment rate is straightforward to read, which is a trait that is desirable. If the unemployment rate is high or growing, this indicates that the economy is experiencing slack or contraction. On the other hand, if the unemployment rate is low or dropping, this indicates that the economy is in good health or expanding. 

The Federal Reserve, as the central banking system of the United States, has the dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and maintaining stable prices. Unemployment reflects the underutilization of labor resources and the potential hampering of economic activity. High unemployment rates can lead to reduced consumer spending, lower tax revenues, and increased social challenges such as poverty and inequality. Conversely, low unemployment rates are associated with positive economic growth through increased consumer spending, increased tax revenues, and an incremental reduction in the measurable metrics of inequality. To address unemployment, the Federal Reserve carefully monitors labor market indicators such as interest rates, job creation, and wage growth. These supplicant indicators help inform the Fed’s decisions regarding monetary policy, which influences interest rates, credit availability, and the cost of borrowing. 

When unemployment is high, the Fed typically implements expansionary monetary policy measures. When unemployment is low, the Fed imposes contractionary policy measures. It is important to remember that the objective of contractionary monetary policy is not to completely halt the rate of demand for goods and services; rather, it is to slow down the rate of demand. Consequently, through the implementation of contractionary policy, higher interest rates can be utilized to bring inflation under control and bring the economy back to the price stability component of the dual mandate. The opposite is true for expansionary monetary measures. 

Both the interest rate and unemployment rate provide valuable insights into the health of the economy. Interest rates, set by central banks, influence borrowing costs for individuals, businesses, and governments. When interest rates are low, it becomes cheaper to borrow money which encourages businesses to invest, governments to finance projects, and consumers to spend. This indicates a tighter labor market and potentially increasing wage pressures. As a result, economic activity increases which leads to job creation and (potentially) lower unemployment rates. Conversely, higher interest rates have the opposite effect, wherein borrowing becomes more expensive and businesses and consumers are discouraged from taking on new debts. Indicating a surplus of labor, there is less pressure on wages to increase. This leads to a decrease in economic activity, slower job growth, and higher levels of unemployment. 

Further, the correlation between the unemployment rate and recessions is also a well-documented phenomenon. As is readily ascertained, there is usually a significant increase in unemployment during economic downturns. This is primarily caused by the contraction of economic activity as it relates to reduced production and demand for goods and services. As businesses struggle to sustain their operations and maintain profitability during a recession, they are compelled to reduce the workforce and subsequently enact a variety of other cost-cutting measures. A predominant leitmotif of contemporary business practice is that it is far more desirable to lay people off than to cut wages to any degree because cutting wages is significantly damaging to public perception. Unemployed individuals have considerably less disposable income, which thus leads to a reduction in consumer spending and a perpetual cycle of economic decline. It is important to note that the relation between these two is not immediate or uniform across all regions. Different industries and geographical areas may experience varying degrees of impact relative to their dependence on the affected sectors. Not to mention that government intervention through monetary and fiscal policy plays a crucial role in mitigating the effects of a recession and unemployment rates. 

The U.S. has undergone tumultuous economic periods throughout the past hundred years. Principally, the largest and most well-known event was the Great Depression, where, seemingly overnight, unemployment skyrocketed to a staggering 24.9% in 1933. In the subsequent years, the rate dropped a little bit but was still carrying steady, hovering around 14% from 1935 to 1940. The outbreak of the second World War was a seminal moment for U.S. industry, wherein our immense production and civic war effort dropped that rate all the way down to 1.2% in 1944. The years following the war, the U.S. had maintained a steady employment situation with the great industries of Europe being destroyed and the U.S., being the only country who was not directly attacked on the homeland, had the materials and the money to rebuild it. (Amadeo, 2022) The next largest recession took place in 1981. Its roots are founded in the Iranian Oil embargo, where the U.S. and its Western allies refused to buy Iranian oil and attempted to get it kicked off the market after the overthrow of the Shah – a western backed leader. The most memorable one of my life was the 2008 Great Recession, where unemployment reached 10% again. This was the longest recession since the depression, and the recovery put millions of people out of their homes and took almost a decade to recover to pre-recession levels. Finally, the short-lived recession taken place during the first year of covid was perhaps the most extreme, as unemployment reached a remarkable 14.7%. Currently, we sit at a relatively comfortable 3.9%, but expectations are rather middling as inflation remains steady and unemployment is beginning to pick up again. (Foster, 2023) 

Bank Failure’s 

A bank failure is the closing of a bank by the state or the federal government. Most of the time banks are closed because they are unable to meet certain standards or criteria that make them successful for the consumers that use them​ (Kagan, 2023)​. The Federal government does have insurance on bank failures that protects depositors’ money in their accounts. This insurance covers up to $250,000 on each account the depositor has ​(Kagan, 2023)​. An insured bank must show an FDIC sign at the teller window, that is how you know, as a depositor, you are insured if the bank were to fail ​(When a Bank Fails - Facts for Depositors, Creditors, and Borrowers, 2014)​. You will be notified if your bank closes, through mail by the Federal government, or by the new bank that is now supporting the failed bank ​(When a Bank Fails - Facts for Depositors, Creditors, and Borrowers, 2014)​. Sometimes, the FDIC will cover the money that is lost or not retrieved by the bank without using state or federal taxes. Bank failures can come from them not being able to make payments or the fact that the value of their assets is not up to the market value needed to be successful ​(Kagan, 2023)​. When a bank fails, that bank will try to borrow money to pay out the depositors, but if they can’t pay them out, the federal government gets involved in bailing them out ​(Kagan, 2023)​. Understanding bank failures is hard because they are always unpredictable. 

Silicon Valley Failure 

One bank failure is the Silicon Valley bank. On March 10th, 2023, Silicon Valley bank in California was shut down ​(Failed Bank Information for Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, CA, n.d.)​. The bank themselves was the 16th largest bank in the U.S and was known for business investments ​(Gobler, 2023)​. No one predicted the fall out and no one was notified when it was closed. The deposits were transferred to the Silicon Valley Bridge Bank, a National Association that was run by the FDIC, so the depositors were protected ​(Failed Bank Information for Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, CA, n.d.)​. The bank failed due to the mass amount of treasury bonds and long-term debt that was not sold properly for the risk they needed to be successful ​(Gobler, 2023)​. Thus, they had higher bonds with higher interest, making the bank decline in value and causing their consumers to come take their money out of the bank ​(Gobler, 2023)​. This caused a nationwide panic. They were then shut down after the investments lost their value and depositors took large sums of money out of their accounts. The main blame is on the bank management, regulation of their procedures, and social media, which caused a country wide panic. The Federal government saw the panic throughout the U.S and made word that all those who deposited in Silicon Valley would see their money and loans back, even if there was no insurance ​(Gobler, 2023)​. First Citizens bank was then shoved into the mix by adopting all depositors/loans from the Silicon Valley failure ​(Gobler, 2023)​.  

Signature Bank Failure 

Another popular bank failure related to the Silicon Failure is the Signature bank failure. This bank failure happened on March 12th of this year, 2023, in New York ​(Failed Bank Information for Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, CA, n.d.)​. Signature bank closed unexpectedly without notice. Those who had money in that bank were notified and their money was transferred to the Signature Bank Bridge, a National Association that is overseen by the FDIC ​(Failed Bank Information for Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, CA, n.d.)​. All the depositor’s money was transferred to this new bank in New York for them to start using instead of Signature bank ​(Failed Bank Information for Silicon Valley Bank, Santa Clara, CA, n.d.)​. Signature Valley was a commercial bank in New York and was known for supporting law offices, real estate, and cryptocurrency ​(Shinn, 2023)​. They had 40 clients and offices around the area and was the 19th largest bank in the U.S. ​(Shinn, 2023)​. This bank failure was one of the three largest bank failures in the history of the U.S. The depositors withdrew more than 10 billion dollars in deposits ​(Son, 2023)​. The reason the bank shut down is because depositors took a lot of money out of their accounts and because of the Silicon Valley bank failure, the social media output a surge of panic throughout the U.S and caused the bank to shut down to control the outburst of anxiety ​(Shinn, 2023)​.  They had a large number of uninsured deposits and those depositors wanted to get their money to avoid any losses, therefore, they made massive withdrawals. This bank failure is important to note because it relates to the Silicon Valley failure ​(Shinn, 2023)​. Social media played a large role in the shutdown of this bank because of the Silicon Valley bank failure. This bank failure in particular was affected by social media and brought up questions surrounding cryptocurrencies and policies around insurance of that.  

First Republic Bank 

This bank failure is similar to both Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank. This bank failure happened on May 1st, 2023, in San Francisco. (Failed Bank Information for First Republic Bank, San Francisco, CA, n.d.) First Republic was a large bank with $229.1 billion in assets. (FDIC, 2023) At the end of 2022 First Republic had $176.4 billion in deposits, of that, 68% exceeded the FDIC’s insurance limit. (Ensign, Brown, Andriotis, Heeb, 2023) These deposits made up 92% of the banks funding. Rising deposit costs were a big problem for First Republic because the majority of its income comes from low-yield, fixed-rate mortgages with an average interest rate of 2.89% (Ensign, Brown, Andriotis, Heeb, 2023) After Silicon Valley Bank failed on March 10th 2023, First Republic’s stock plummeted and customers were no longer satisfied with earning very little on their deposits. Customers started moving their money out, slowly at first, and then all at once. (Ensign, Brown, Andriotis, Heeb, 2023) On Monday, May 1st, 2023, First Republic Bank was closed by the California Department of Financial Protection and Innovation after the bank lost $100 billion in deposits. (FDIC, 2023) (Ensign, Brown, Andriotis, Heeb, 2023) 

Financial System Emergencies 

In addition to regular monetary policy tools the Fed can use US Dollar Funding Facilities and Emergency Lending. US Dollar Funding Facilities are designed to solve economic problems in different countries that may affect the U.S. The Federal reserve does this by temporarily exchanging Dollars for the foreign financial markets' currency. These dollar funding techniques usually work because the U.S. Dollar is a stable currency and might bring balance to an unstable foreign market. (Federal Reserve, 2023) 

Overall, the Federal Reserve has many jobs in keeping our economy afloat. They must adjust rates, balance changes with the monetary policy and fiscal policy, control unemployment, and make sure all banks are running properly. If it weren’t for the Federal Reserve, our economy would have a challenging time running and staying at the high production rate we have. As an economy we are lucky to have the policies in place to try and keep unemployment down and prices stable so we can maintain our standard of living.
